---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 1.0.0 Release"
date: "2020-07-16 00:00:00 -0600"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 1.0.0 release. This covers
over 2 months of development work and includes [**XX resolved issues**][1]
from [**XX distinct contributors**][2]. See the Install Page to learn how to
get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## 1.0 Format Release

The Arrow format received several changes and additions, leading to the
1.0 format version:

* The metadata version was bumped to a new version V5, indicating an
  incompatible change in the buffer layour of Union types (ARROW-9258).
  All other types keep the same layout as in V4.

* Dictionary indices are now allowed to be unsigned rather than signed
  (ARROW-9259). Using UInt64 is still discouraged because of poor Java
  support.

* A "Feature" enum has been added to announce the use of specific optional
  features in an IPC stream, such as buffer compression (ARROW-9308).  This
  new field is not used by any implementation yet.

* Optional buffer compression using LZ4 or ZStandard was added to the IPC
  format (ARROW-300).

* Decimal types now have an optional "bitWidth" field, defaulting to 128
  (ARROW-8985).  This will allow for future support of other decimal widths
  such as 32- and 64-bit.

The 1.0 major release indicates that the Arrow columnar format is declared
stable, with [forward and backward compatibility guarantees][5].

Integration testing has been expanded to test for extension types and
nested dictionaries.

XXX Link to implementation matrix

Format changes: unions, unsigned int dictionary indices, decimal bit width,
feature enum.

## Community

Since the last release, we have added two new committers:

* Liya Fan
* Ji Liu

Thank you for all your contributions!

## Arrow Flight RPC notes

Flight now offers DoExchange, a fully bidirectional data endpoint, in addition
to DoGet and DoPut, in C++, Java, and Python. Middlewares in all languages now
expose binary-valued headers. Additionally, servers and clients can set Arrow
IPC read/write options in all languages, making compatibility easier with earlier
versions of Arrow Flight.

In C++ and Python, Flight now exposes more options from gRPC, including the
address of the client (on the server) and the ability to set low-level gRPC
client options. Flight also supports mutual TLS authentication and the ability
for a client to control the size of a data message on the wire.

## C++ notes

Support for static linking with Arrow has been vastly improved, including the
introduction of a `libarrow_bundled_dependencies.a` library bundling all
required dependencies together.

Following the Arrow format changes, Union arrays cannot have a top-level
bitmap anymore.

A number of improvements were made to reduce the overall code size in the
Arrow library.

A convenience API `GetBuildInfo` allows querying the characteristics of
the Arrow library.  We encourage you to suggest any desired
addition to the returned information.

We added an optional dependency to the `utf8proc` library, used in several
compute functions (see below).

Instead of sharing the same concrete classes, sparse and dense unions now
have separated classes (`SparseUnionType` and `DenseUnionType`, as well
as `SparseUnionArray`, `DenseUnionArray`, `SparseUnionScalar`,
`DenseUnionScalar`).

Arrow can now be built for iOS using the right set of CMake options, though
we don't officially support it.  See
[this writeup](https://github.com/UnfoldedInc/deck.gl-native-dependencies/blob/master/docs/iOS-BUILD.md#arrow-v0170)
for details.

### Compute functions

The compute kernel layer was extensively reworked (ARROW-8792).  It now offers
a generic function lookup, dispatch and execution mechanism.  Furthermore,
elaborate internal scaffoldings make it vastly easier to write new function
kernels.

Several compute functions have been added.  Unicode-compliant predicates and
transforms, such as lowercase and uppercase transforms, are now available.

The available compute functions are listed exhaustively in the Sphinx-generated
documentation.

### Datasets

Datasets can now be read from CSV files.

Datasets can be expanded to their component fragments, enabling fine grained
interoperability with other consumers of data files. Where applicable, metadata
is available as a property of the fragment, including partition information and
(for the parquet format) per-column statistics.

Datasets of parquet files can now be assembled from a single `_metadata` file,
such as those created by systems like Dask and Spark. `_metadata`
contains the metadata of all fragments, allowing construction of a statistics-
aware dataset with a single IO call.

### Feather

The Feather format is now available in version 2, which is simply the Arrow
IPC file format with another name.

### IPC

By default, we now write IPC streams with metadata V5.  However, metadata V4
can be requested by setting the appropriate member in `IpcWriteOptions`.

V4 as well as V5 metadata IPC streams can be read properly, with one
exception: a V4 metadata stream containing Union arrays with top-level
null values will refuse reading.

Support for dictionary replacement and dictionary delta was implemented.

### Parquet

Writing files with the LZ4 codec is disabled, because it produces files
incompatible with the widely-used Hadoop Parquet implementation.
Support will be reenabled once we align the LZ4 implementation with the
special buffer encoding expected by Hadoop.

## Java notes

The Java package introduces a number of low level changes in this release.
Most notable are the work in support of allocating large arrow buffers and
removing Netty from the public API. Users will have to update their
dependencies to use one of the two supported allocators Netty:
`arrow-memory-netty` or Unsafe (internal java api for direct memory)
`arrow-memory-unsafe`.

The Java Vector implementation has improved its interoperability having
verified `LargeVarChar`, `LargeBinary`, `LargeList`, `Union`, Extension types
and duplicate field names in `Structs` are binary compatible with C++ and the
specification.

## Python notes

The size of wheel packages is significantly reduced.  One side effect is
that these wheels do not enable Gandiva anymore.

The Scalar class hierarchy was reworked to more closely follow its C++
counterpart.

TLS CA certificates are looked up more reliably when using the S3 filesystem,
especially with manylinux wheels.

The encoding of CSV files can now be specified explicitly, defaulting to UTF8.  
Custom timestamp parsers can now be used for CSV files.

Filesystems can now be implemented in pure Python.  As a result,
[fsspec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io)-based filesystems can now
be used in datasets.

`parquet.read_table` is now backed by the dataset API by default, enabling
filters on any column and more flexible partitioning.

## R notes

The R package added support for converting to and from many additional Arrow
types. Tables showing how R types are mapped to Arrow types and vice versa have
been added to the [introductory vignette][6], and nearly all types are handled.
In addition, R `attributes` like custom classes and metadata are now preserved
when converting a `data.frame` to an Arrow Table and are restored when loading
them back into R.

For more on what’s in the 1.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

### Ruby

### C GLib

## Rust notes


[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%201.0.0
[2]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/1.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/1.0.0.html
[4]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Versioning.html
[6]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/arrow.html
