---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 0.16.0 Release"
date: "2020-02-12 00:00:00 -0600"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.16.0 release. This covers
about 4 months of development work and includes [**735 resolved issues**][1]
from [**99 distinct contributors**][2].  See the Install Page to learn how to
get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release.  Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## New committers

Since the 0.15.0 release, we've added two new committers:

* [Eric Erhardt][4]
* [Joris Van den Bossche][5]

Thank you for all your contributions!

## Columnar Format Notes

We still have work to do to complete comprehensive columnar format integration
testing between the Java and C++ libraries. Once this work is completed, we
intend to make a 1.0.0 release with [forward and backward compatibility
guarantees][23].

We [clarified some ambiguity][27] on dictionary encoding in the specification.
Work is on going to implement the features in Arrow libraries.

## Arrow Flight RPC notes

Flight development work has recently focused on robustness and stability. If
you are not yet familiar with Flight, read the [introductory blog post from
October][24].

We are also discussing adding a "bidirectional RPC" which enables
request-response workflows requiring both client and server to send data
streams to be performed a single RPC request.

## C++ notes

Some work has been done to make the default build configuration of Arrow C++ as
lean as possible. The Arrow C++ core can now be built without any external
dependencies other than a new enough C++ compiler (gcc 4.9 or higher). Notably,
Boost is no longer required. We invested effort to vendor some small essential
dependencies: Flatbuffers, double-conversion, and uriparser. Many optional
features requiring external libraries, like compression and GLog integration,
are now disabled by default. Several subcomponents of the C++ project like the
filesystem API, CSV, compute, dataset and JSON layers, as well as command-line
utilities, are now disabled by default. The only toolchain dependency enabled
by default is jemalloc, the recommended memory allocator, but this can also be
disabled if desired. For illustration, see the [example minimal build script and
Dockerfile][28].

When enabled, the default jemalloc configuration has been tweaked to return
memory more aggressively to the OS (ARROW-6910, ARROW-6994). We welcome
feedback from users about our memory allocation configuration and performance
in applications.

The array validation facilities have been vastly expanded and now exist in
two flavors: the `Validate` method does a light-weight validation that's
O(1) in array size, while the potentially O(N) method `ValidateFull` does
thorough data validation (ARROW-6157).

The IO APIs now use `Result<T>` when returning both a Status
and result value, rather than taking a pointer-out function parameter
(ARROW-7235).

### C++: CSV

An option is added to attempt automatic dictionary encoding of string columns
during reading a CSV file, until a cardinality limit is reached. When
successful, it can make reading faster and the resulting Arrow data is
much more memory-efficient (ARROW-3408).

The CSV APIs now use `Result<T>` when returning both a Status
and result value, rather than taking a pointer-out function parameter
(ARROW-7236).

### C++: Datasets

The 0.16 release introduces the Datasets API to the C++ library, along with
bindings in Python and R.  This API allows you to treat multiple files as a
single logical dataset entity and make efficient selection queries against it.
This release includes support for Parquet and Arrow IPC file formats.  Factory
objects allow you to discover files in a directory recursively, inspect the
schemas in the files, and performs some basic schema unification.  You may
specify how file path segments map to partition, and there is support for
auto-detecting some partition information, including Hive-style partitioning.
The Datasets API includes a filter expression syntax as well as column
selection.  These are evaluated with predicate pushdown, and for Parquet,
evaluation is pushed down to row groups.

### C++: Filesystem layer

An HDFS implementation of the FileSystem class is available (ARROW-6720). We
plan to deprecate the prior bespoke C++ HDFS class in favor of the standardized
filesystem API.

The filesystem APIs now use `Result<T>` when returning both a Status
and result value, rather than taking a pointer-out function parameter
(ARROW-7161).

### C++: IPC

The Arrow IPC reader is being fuzzed continuously by the [OSS-Fuzz][6]
infrastructure, to detect undesirable behavior on invalid or malicious input.
Several issues have already been found and fixed.

### C++: Parquet

[Modular encryption][10] is now supported (PARQUET-1300).

A performance regression when reading a file with a large number of columns has
been fixed (ARROW-6876, ARROW-7059), as well as several bugs (PARQUET-1766,
ARROW-6895).

### C++: Tensors

CSC sparse matrices are supported (ARROW-4225).

The Tensor APIs now use `Result<T>` when returning both a Status
and result value, rather than taking a pointer-out function parameter
(ARROW-7420).

## C# Notes

There were a number of C# bug fixes this release. Note that the C# library is
not yet being tested in CI against the other native Arrow implementations
(integration tests). We are looking for more contributors for the C# project to
help with this and other new feature development.

## Java notes

* Added prose documentation describing how to work with the Java libraries.
* Some additional algorithms have been added to the "contrib" algorithms package:  multithreaded searching of ValueVectors,
* The memory modules have been refactored so non-netty allocators can now be used.
* A new utility for populating ValueVectors  more concisely for testing was introduced
* The "contrib" Avro adapter now supports Avro Logical type conversion to corresponding Arrow type.
* Various bug fixes across all packages

## Python notes

pyarrow 0.16 will be the last release to support Python 2.7.

Python now has bindings for the datasets API (ARROW-6341) as well as the S3
(ARROW-6655) and HDFS (ARROW-7310) filesystem implementations.

The Duration (ARROW-5855) and Fixed Size List (ARROW-7261) types are exposed
in Python.

Sparse tensors can be converted to dense tensors (ARROW-6624).  They are
also interoperable with the `pydata/sparse` and `scipy.sparse` libraries
(ARROW-4223, ARROW-4224).

Pandas extension arrays now are able to roundtrip through Arrow conversion
(ARROW-2428).

A memory leak when converting Arrow data to Pandas "object" data has been
fixed (ARROW-6874).

Arrow is now tested against Python 3.8, and we now build manylinux2014 wheels
for Python 3 (ARROW-7344).

## R notes

This release includes a `dplyr` interface to Arrow Datasets,
which let you work efficiently with large, multi-file datasets as a single entity.
See [`vignette("dataset", package = "arrow")`][25] for more.

Another major area of work in this release was to improve the installation
experience on Linux. A source package installation (as from CRAN) will now
handle its C++ dependencies automatically, with no system dependencies beyond what R requires.
For common Linux distributions and versions, installation will retrieve a prebuilt static
C++ library for inclusion in the package; where this binary is not available,
the package executes a bundled script that should build the Arrow C++ library.
See [`vignette("install", package = "arrow")`][26] for details.

For more on what's in the 0.16 R package, see the R [changelog][14].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

Ruby and C GLib continues to follow the features in the C++ project.

### Ruby

Ruby includes the following improvements.

* Improve CSV save performance (ARROW-7474).
* Add support for saving/loading TSV (ARROW-7454).
* Add `Arrow::Schema#build_expression` to improve building `Gandiva::Expression` (ARROW-6619).

### C GLib

C GLib includes the following changes.

* Add support for LargeList, LargeBinary, and LargeString (ARROW-6285, ARROW-6286).
* Add filter and take API for GArrowTable, GArrowChunkedArray, and GArrowRecordBatch (ARROW-7110, ARROW-7111).
* Add `garrow_table_combine_chunks()` API (ARROW-7369).

## Rust notes

Support for Arrow data types has been improved, with the following array types now supported (ARROW-3690):

* Fixed Size List and Fixed Size Binary
* Adding a String Array for utf-8 strings, and keeping the Binary Array for general binary data
* Duration and interval arrays.

Initial work on Arrow IPC support has been completed, with readers and writers for streams and files implemented (ARROW-5180).

### Rust: DataFusion

Query execution has been reimplemented with an extensible physical query plan. This allows other projects to add other plans, such as for distributed computing or for specific database servers (ARROW-5227).

Added support for writing query results to CSV (ARROW-6274).

The new Parquet -> Arrow reader is now used to read Parquet files (ARROW-6700).

Various other query improvements have been implemented, especially on grouping and aggregate queries (ARROW-6689).

### Rust: Parquet

The Arrow reader integration has been completed, allowing Parquet files to be
read into Arrow memory (ARROW-4059).

## Development notes

Arrow has moved away from Travis-CI and is now using Github Actions for
PR-based continuous integration.  This new CI configuration relies heavily
on `docker-compose`, making it easier for developers to reproduce builds
locally, thanks to tremendous work by Krisztián Szűcs (ARROW-7101).

## Community Discussions Ongoing

There are a number of active discussions ongoing on the developer
dev@arrow.apache.org mailing list. We look forward to hearing from the
community there.

* Mandatory fields in IPC format: to ease input validation, it is being
  [proposed][20] to mark some fields in our Flatbuffers schema "required".
  Those fields are already semantically required, but are not considered so by
  the generated Flatbuffers verifier.  Before accepting this proposal, we need
  to ensure that it does not break binary compatibility with existing valid
  data.
* The C Data Interface has not yet been formally adopted, though the community
  has reached consensus to move forward after addressing various design
  questions and concerns.
* Guidelines for the use of "unsafe" in the Rust implementation are being
  [discussed][22].

[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%200.16.0
[2]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.16.0.html#contributors
[3]: https://arrow.apache.org/release/0.16.0.html
[4]: https://github.com/eerhardt
[5]: https://github.com/jorisvandenbossche
[6]: https://google.github.io/oss-fuzz/
[10]: https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/Encryption.md
[14]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/news/
[20]: https://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/arrow-dev/202001.mbox/%3C0dd13489-9221-459a-3560-1426738d3bb4%40python.org%3E
[21]: https://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/arrow-dev/202001.mbox/%3CCAKa9qDkrcyL2UH0q1igDRwHeLWoE%2B%2B8Cac_%3DxbX%2Badoy-a0pSw%40mail.gmail.com%3E
[22]: https://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/arrow-dev/202001.mbox/%3cMN2PR19MB347050FB22046485C0B2525EDD380@MN2PR19MB3470.namprd19.prod.outlook.com%3e
[23]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Versioning.html
[24]: https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2019/10/13/introducing-arrow-flight/
[25]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/dataset.html
[26]: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/install.html
[27]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/commit/0ddc1f4737c35008cd06be1ee28472ebd7da68e2
[28]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/examples/minimal_build/build.sh
