---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 6.0.1 Release"
date: "2021-11-22 00:00:00 -0600"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 6.0.1 release.
This is mostly a bugfix release that includes [**30 resolved issues**][1]
from [**16 distinct contributors**][2]. See the Install Page to learn how to
get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 6.0.0 release, Joris Van den Bossche has joined the Project Management Committee (PMC). 
Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## Documentation

A version switcher is now available in the Python and C++ documentation
to access different versions of the documentation.

## C++ notes

* Trying to join with a list column will now report an unsupported operation
  error instead of crashing.
* Dictionaries are now supported as an input in hash joins
* Fixed a potential data loss in S3 multipart upload

## Python notes

* Dataset api now supports `existing_data_behavior` option when writing datasets.
* Installing pyarrow from source distribution now works with setuptools 58.5

## R notes

* Fixed a crash when summarizing after filtering to no rows
* Added bindings for `str_count`

For more details, see the [complete R changelog][4]. 

## Go notes

* Arrow and Parquet modules are properly brought together under a top level `github.com/apache/arrow/go` module which can be installed as `github.com/apache/arrow/go/v6/arrow@v6.0.1`.


[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%206.0.1
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/6.0.1.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/6.0.1.html
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
