---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 9.0.0 Release"
date: "2022-08-01 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 9.0.0 release. This covers
over 3 months of development work and includes [**473 resolved issues**][1]
from [**YYY distinct contributors**][2]. See the Install Page to learn how to
get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 8.0.0 release, Dewey Dunnington, Alenka Frim and Rok Mihevc
have been invited to be committers.
Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## Columnar Format Notes

## Arrow Flight RPC notes

Arrow Flight is now available in MacOS M1 Python wheels ([ARROW-16779](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-16779)).
Arrow Flight SQL is now buildable on Windows ([ARROW-16902](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-16902)).
Ruby now exposes more of the Flight and Flight SQL APIs (various JIRAs). 

## C++ notes

STL-like iteration is now provided over chunked arrays (ARROW-602).

### Compute

The C++ compute and execution engine is now officially named "Acero", though
its C++ namespaces have not changed.

New light-weight data holder abstractions have been introduced in order
to reduce the overhead of invoking compute functions and kernels, especially
at the small data sizes desirable for efficient parallelization (typically
L1- or L2-sized).  Specifically, the non-owning `ArraySpan` and `ExecSpan`
structures have internally superseded the much heavier `ExecBatch`, which
is still supported for compatibility at the API level
(ARROW-16756, ARROW-16824, ARROW-16852).

In a similar vein, the `ValueDescr` class was removed and `ScalarKernel`
implementations now always receive at least one non-scalar input, removing
the special case where a `ScalarKernel` needs to output a scalar rather than
an array. The higher-level compute APIs still allow executing a scalar function
over all-scalar inputs; but those scalars are internally broadcasted to
1-element arrays so as to simplify kernel implementation (ARROW-16757).

Timestamp comparison is now supported (ARROW-16425).

A cumulative sum function is implemented over numeric inputs (ARROW-13530).

Temporal rounding functions received additional options to control how
rounding is done (ARROW-14821).

Improper computation of the "mode" function on boolean input was fixed
(ARROW-17096).

Function registries can now be nested (ARROW-16677).

### Dataset

The `autogenerate_column_names` option for CSV reading is now handled correctly
(ARROW-16436).

Fix `InMemoryDataset::ReplaceSchema` to actually replace the schema
(ARROW-16085).

Fix `FilenamePartitioning` to properly support null values (ARROW-16302).

### Filesystem

A number of bugfixes and improvements were made to the Google Cloud Storage
filesystem implementation (ARROW-14892).

By default, the S3 filesystem implementation does not create or drop buckets
anymore (ARROW-15906). This is a compatibility-breaking change intended
to prevent user errors from having potentially catastrophic consequences.
Options have been added to restore the previous behavior if necessary.

### Parquet

The default Parquet version is now 2.4 for writing, enabling use of
more recent logical types by default (ARROW-12203).

Non-nullable fields are now handled correctly by the Parquet reader
(ARROW-16116).

Reading encrypted files should now be thread-safe (ARROW-14114).

Statistics equality now works correctly with minmax (ARROW-16487).

The minimum Thrift version required for building is now 0.13 (ARROW-16721).

The Thrift deserialization limits can now be configured to accomodate for
data files with very large metadata (ARROW-16546).

### Substrait

The Substrait spec has been updated to 0.6.0 (ARROW-16816). In addition, a
larger subset of the Substrait specification is now supported (ARROW-15587,
ARROW-15590, ARROW-15901, ARROW-16657, ARROW-15591).

## C# notes

## Go notes

## Java notes

## JavaScript notes

## Python notes

## R notes

For more on what’s in the 9.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

### Ruby

### C GLib

## Rust notes

The Rust projects have moved to separate repositories outside the
main Arrow monorepo. For notes on the 19.0.0 release of the Rust
implementation, see the [Arrow Rust changelog][5].

[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%209.0.0
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/9.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/9.0.0.html#changelog
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/blob/19.0.0/CHANGELOG.md
