---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 8.0.0 Release"
date: "2022-05-05 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 8.0.0 release. This covers
over 3 months of development work and includes [**586 resolved issues**][1]
from [**YYY distinct contributors**][2]. See the Install Page to learn how to
get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 7.0.0 release, Kun Liu, Raphael Taylor-Davies Xudong Wang, Yijie Shen
and Liang-Chi Hsieh have been invited to be committers.
Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## Columnar Format Notes

## Arrow Flight RPC notes

Flight SQL has been extended with a method to get type metadata ([ARROW-15313](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15313)) and column metadata in returned schemas ([ARROW-15314](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15314), [ARROW-16064](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-16064)) New documentation is available describing Flight and Flight SQL, along with several Cookbook recipes ([ARROW-14698](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-14698), [ARROW-16065](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-16065)).

The C++ libraries now support UCX as a network transport ([ARROW-15706](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15706)), and the APIs have been refactored to allow other transports to be implemented ([ARROW-15282](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15282)). UCX support is experimental and still subject to change. Many of the APIs have been refactored to use the `arrow::Result` type, and the original variants have been deprecated ([ARROW-16032](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-16032)). Support for gRPC >= 1.43 has been added ([ARROW-15551](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-15551)).
## C++ notes

### Compute

Arrow C++ can now optionally build with support for the experimental
[Substrait](https://substrait.io/) query representation format (ARROW-15238).

A number of compute kernels operating on temporal data have been added:

* addition, subtraction and multiplication between various temporal types;
* a new "is_dst" function to compute whether the input timestamps fall within
daylight saving time (DST);
* a new "is_leap_year" function to compute whether the input timestamps fall
within a leap year.

It is possible to enable a timezone database on Windows at runtime
by calling the `arrow::Initialize()` function (ARROW-13168).

New hash aggregations are available: "hash_one" to return one value from each
group (ARROW-13993), and "hash_list" to return all values from each group
(ARROW-15152).  Null columns are now supported on the sum, mean and product
hash aggregates (ARROW-15506).  Also, it is now possible to execute hash
"aggregations" with only key columns (ARROW-15609).

A new compute function "map_lookup" allows looking up a given key in a map
array (ARROW-15089).

New compute functions "sqrt" and "sqrt_checked" allow extracting the square
root of their input (ARROW-15614).

Casting between two struct types is now possible, assuming the destination field
names all exist in the source struct type (ARROW-1888, ARROW-15643).

Optional OpenTelemetry tracing has been added to kernel functions and execution
plan nodes (ARROW-15061).

The CMake build option `ARROW_ENGINE` has been renamed to `ARROW_SUBSTRAIT`,
to better reflect its actual effect (ARROW-16158).

### CSV

It is now possible to change the field delimiter when writing a CSV file
(ARROW-15672).

### Dataset

The ORC dataset scanner now observes the batch size parameter (ARROW-14153).

The dataset layer now supports filename-based partitioning, where the data
files are all laid out in the dataset's base directory, their names prefixed
with the partition values separated by underscore characters (ARROW-14612).

Optional OpenTelemetry tracing has been added to the dataset scanner (ARROW-15067).

### Filesystem

It is possible to instantiate a Google Cloud Storage (GCS) filesystem
from a URI, making GCS implicitly usable in the datasets layer (ARROW-14893).
Recognized URI schemes are `gs` and `gcs`.

`FileSystem::DeleteDirContents` can now optionally succeed when the directory
doesn't exist (ARROW-16159).

### IO

It is possible to override the number of IO threads using the
environment variable `ARROW_IO_THREADS` (ARROW-15941).

### IPC

The IPC file reader and writer now allow accessing the custom metadata
associated with record batches (ARROW-16131).

### Miscellaneous

It is possible to enable lightweight memory checks on the standard memory pools
using a dedicated environment variable `ARROW_DEBUG_MEMORY_POOL` (ARROW-15550).
These checks are not a replacement for sophisticated checkers such as Address
Sanitizer or Valgrind, but might come up useful if those tools are not
available.

Temporal data is now validated when doing full array validation (ARROW-10924).
The validation catches values not matching the specification (for example,
a time value being outside of the span of one day).

The GDB plugin now attempts to print the data of an array, in addition to its
metadata (ARROW-15389).  This only works for primitive datatypes.

Pretty-printing is now shorter and more customizable for nested datatypes
(ARROW-14798).

## C# notes

## Go notes

## Java notes
* Java 17 is now supported as a target and has been added to tested platforms
* When scanning datasets an `ArrowReader` is now returned, which makes easier to create `VectorSchemaRoot` from it.
* Java Documentation had a overall improvement, with few sections added and most sections rewritten as more clear tutorials
* Overall improvements to FlightSQL support in Java
* [Java Cookbook](https://arrow.apache.org/cookbook/java/index.html) is now available
## JavaScript notes

## Python notes

## R notes

For more on what’s in the 8.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

### Ruby

### C GLib

## Rust notes

The Rust projects have moved to separate repositories outside the
main Arrow monorepo. For notes on the 13.0.0 release of the Rust
implementation, see the [Arrow Rust changelog][5].

[1]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/issues/?jql=project%20%3D%20ARROW%20AND%20status%20%3D%20Resolved%20AND%20fixVersion%20%3D%208.0.0
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/8.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/8.0.0.html#changelog
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/blob/13.0.0/CHANGELOG.md
