---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow ADBC 0.7.0 (Libraries) Release"
date: "2023-09-23 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.7.0 release of
the Apache Arrow ADBC libraries. This covers includes [**50
resolved issues**][1] from [**8 distinct contributors**][2].

This is a release of the **libraries**, which are at version
0.7.0.  The **API specification** is versioned separately and is
at version 1.1.0.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected
highlights of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have
been made: we refer you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Release Highlights

This is the first release to implement version 1.1.0 of the ADBC API
specification.  The [documentation][api-changelog] has a fuller
overview of new features, but in brief:

- More common options and info keys were added, and clients can now
  retrieve option values instead of only being able to set them.
- Connections/statements can be cancelled.
- Drivers can add arbitrary metadata to errors.  For example, the
  Flight SQL driver exposes gRPC status details, and the PostgreSQL
  driver provides PostgreSQL-specific error fields.
- Miscellaneous other APIs to cover specific feature gaps (e.g.
  getting/setting the 'active' catalog and schema).

The PostgreSQL and SQLite drivers support ingesting Arrow data into
temporary tables, and targeting a table in a particular namespace.
Also, they handle quoting of table/column names in bulk ingestion
better.  Both drivers also support more Arrow types when executing
queries and ingesting data.

The FlightSQL driver supports basic logging via configuration in
Go code or via an environment variable when built as a shared library
(for Python/R).

The Snowflake driver properly handles `TIME` fields.

The minimum Go version was bumped to 1.19 (in line with the next
release of the Arrow Go libraries).

R drivers expose functions to quote/escape names and strings for the
specific backend.

The Python DBAPI layer wraps Arrow record batch readers to raise
ADBC exceptions if the driver provides error metadata (see above).

## Contributors

```
$ git shortlog --perl-regexp --author='^((?!dependabot\[bot\]).*)$' -sn apache-arrow-adbc-0.6.0..apache-arrow-adbc-0.7.0
    26	David Li
     7	Dewey Dunnington
     7	William Ayd
     2	ElenaHenderson
     1	Matt Topol
     1	Solomon Choe
     1	Sutou Kouhei
     1	davidhcoe
```

## Roadmap

Work continues on improving the existing drivers in terms of supported
Arrow/database types, performance, and so on.

For Java, the minimum JDK version may be raised from JDK 8 to 11 or 17,
a move that the Arrow Java libraries are also considering.

There are currently no plans for a second API revision. As work progresses
on asynchronous and device-aware APIs in the Arrow ecosystem, ADBC will
eventually be updated to support any new APIs.

## Getting Involved

We welcome questions and contributions from all interested.  Issues
can be filed on [GitHub][4], and questions can be directed to GitHub
or the [Arrow mailing lists][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/milestone/11
[2]: #contributors
[3]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/blob/apache-arrow-adbc-0.7.0/CHANGELOG.md
[4]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues
[5]: {% link community.md %}

[api-changelog]: https://arrow.apache.org/adbc/current/format/specification.html#version-1-1-0
