---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 13.0.0 Release"
date: "2023-07-17 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 13.0.0 release. This covers
over 3 months of development work and includes [**XXX resolved issues**][1]
from [**YYY distinct contributors**][2]. See the [Install Page](https://arrow.apache.org/install/)
to learn how to get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 12.0.0 release, Marco Neumann, Gang Wu, Mehmet Ozan Kabak and Kevin Gurney
have been invited to be committers.
Matt Topol, Jie Wen, Ben Baumgold and Dewey Dunnington have joined the
Project Management Committee (PMC).

Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## Columnar Format Notes

### C Device Data Interface

An **experimental** new specification, the
[C Device Data Interface](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/format/CDeviceDataInterface.html),
has been accepted for inclusion (GH-34971). It builds on the existing
C Data Interface to provide a runtime-agnostic zero-copy sharing mechanism
for Arrow data residing on non-CPU devices.

Reference implementations of the C Device Data Interface will progressively
be added to the standard Arrow libraries after the 13.0.0 release.

## Arrow Flight RPC notes

## C++ notes

### Building

CMake 3.16 or later is now required for building Arrow C++ (GH-34921).

Optimizations are not disabled anymore when the `RelWithDebInfo` build type
is selected (GH-35850). Furthermore, compiler flags can now properly be
customized per-build type using `ARROW_C_FLAGS_DEBUG`, `ARROW_CXX_FLAGS_DEBUG`
and related variables (GH-35870).

### Acero

Handling of unaligned buffers is input nodes can be configured programmatically
or by setting the environment variable `ACERO_ALIGNMENT_HANDLING`. The default
behavior is to warn when an unaligned buffer is detected (GH-35498).

### Compute

Several new functions have been added:
* aggregate functions "first", "last", "first_last" (GH-34911);
* vector functions "cumulative_prod", "cumulative_min", "cumulative_max" (GH-32190);
* vector function "pairwise_diff" (GH-35786).

Sorting now works on dictionary arrays, with a much better performance than
the naive approach of sorting the decoded dictionary (GH-29887). Sorting also
works on struct arrays, and nested sort keys are supported using `FieldRed` (GH-33206).

The `check_overflow` option has been removed from `CumulativeSumOptions` as
it was redundant with the availability of two different functions:
"cumulative_sum" and "cumulative_sum_checked" (GH-35789).

Run-end encoded filters are efficiently supported (GH-35749).

Duration types are supported with the "is_in" and "index_in" functions (GH-36047).
They can be multiplied with all integer types (GH-36128).

"is_in" and "index_in" now cast their inputs more flexibly: they first attempt
to cast the value set to the input type, then in the other direction if the
former fails (GH-36203).

Multiple bugs have been fixed in "utf8_slice_codeunits" when the `stop` option
is omitted (GH-36311).

### Dataset

A custom schema can now be passed when writing a dataset (GH-35730). The custom
schema can alter nullability or metadata information, but is not allowed to
change the datatypes written.

### Filesystems

The S3 filesystem now writes files in equal-sized chunks, for compatibility with
Cloudflare's "R2" Storage (GH-34363).

A long-standing issue where S3 support could crash at shutdown because of resources
still being alive after S3 finalization has been fixed (GH-36346). Now, attempts
to use S3 resources (such as making filesystem calls) after S3 finalization should
result in a clean error.

The GCS filesystem accepts a new option to set the project id (GH-36227).

### IPC

Nullability and metadata information for sub-fields of map types is now preserved
when deserializing Arrow IPC (GH-35297).

### Orc

The Orc adapter now maps Arrow field metadata to Orc type attributes when writing,
and vice-versa when reading (GH-35304).

### Parquet

It is now possible to write additional metadata while a `ParquetFileWriter` is
open (GH-34888).

Writing a page index can be enabled selectively per-column (GH-34949).
In addition, page header statistics are not written anymore if the page
index is enabled for the given column (GH-34375), as the information would
be redundant and less efficiently accessed.

Parquet writer properties allow specifying the sorting columns (GH-35331).
The user is responsible for ensuring that the data written to the file
actually complies with the given sorting.

CRC computation has been implemented for v2 data pages (GH-35171).
It was already implemented for v1 data pages.

Writing compliant nested types is now enabled by default (GH-29781). This
should not have any negative implication.

Attempting to load a subset of an Arrow extension type is now forbidden
(GH-20385). Previously, if an extension type's storage is nested (for example
a "Point" extension type backed by a `struct<x: float64, y: float64>`),
it was possible to load selectively some of the columns of the storage type.

### Substrait

Support for various functions has been added: "stddev", "variance", "first",
"last" (GH-35247, GH-35506).

Deserializing sorts is now supported (GH-32763). However, some features,
such as clustered sort direction or custom sort functions, are not
implemented.

### Miscellaneous

`FieldRef` sports additional methods to get a flattened version of nested
fields (GH-14946). Compared to their non-flattened counterparts,
the methods `GetFlattened`, `GetAllFlattened`, `GetOneFlattened` and
`GetOneOrNoneFlattened` combine a child's null bitmap with its ancestors'
null bitmaps such as to compute the field's overall logical validity bitmap.

In other words, given the struct array `[null, {'x': null}, {'x': 5}]`,
`FieldRef("x")::Get` might return `[0, null, 5]`
while `FieldRef("y")::GetFlattened` will *always* return `[null, null, 5]`.

`Scalar::hash()` has been fixed for sliced nested arrays (GH-35360).

A new floating-point to decimal conversion algorithm exhibits much better
precision (GH-35576).

It is now possible to cast between scalars of different list-like types
(GH-36309).

## C# notes

## Go notes

## Java notes

## JavaScript notes

## Python notes


## R notes

For more on what’s in the 13.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes


## Rust notes

The Rust projects have moved to separate repositories outside the
main Arrow monorepo. For notes on the latest release of the Rust
implementation, see the latest [Arrow Rust changelog][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/milestone/51?closed=1
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/13.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/13.0.0.html#changelog
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/tags
