---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow ADBC 0.5.0 (Libraries) Release"
date: "2023-06-22 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.5.0 release of
the Apache Arrow ADBC libraries. This covers includes [**37
resolved issues**][1] from [**12 distinct contributors**][2].

This is a release of the **libraries**, which are at version
0.5.0.  The **API specification** is versioned separately and is
at version 1.0.0.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected
highlights of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have
been made: we refer you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Release Highlights

Experimental C♯ and Rust codebases were added to the source tree.  No packages are released for them yet.

Go-based drivers, when using FFI, will now catch panics at the interface boundary and return them as errors.  Afterwards, all calls to the driver will immediately fail.  This lets applications handle errors and gracefully terminate instead of immediately aborting.

The JDBC adapter allows customizing the type mapping between JDBC types and Arrow types, using all the information provided by JDBC.  This allows proper mappings for certain databases (e.g. the PostgreSQL JDBC driver returns both tz-aware and tz-naive timestamps under the same type code, but differentiates them via the type name).

The PostgreSQL driver has better support for reading and writing different types, including datetime types in particular.  More metadata is now returned in GetObjects, including tables, columns, and constraints (primary/foreign keys).  The driver also now handles non-SELECT queries in `ExecuteQuery`.

The Python driver manager lets you choose whether to disable or enable autocommit.

The R driver manager now exposes easy convenience functions for reading/writing data.

## Contributors

```
$ git shortlog --perl-regexp --author='^((?!dependabot\[bot\]).*)$' -sn apache-arrow-adbc-0.4.0..apache-arrow-adbc-0.5.0
    36	David Li
    21	William Ayd
     6	Dewey Dunnington
     4	Matt Topol
     3	Kirill Müller
     2	Sutou Kouhei
     2	vipere
     1	Curt Hagenlocher
     1	Diego Fernández Giraldo
     1	Matthijs Brobbel
     1	Will Jones
     1	davidhcoe
```

## Roadmap

Work for the proposed [1.1.0 API revision][adbc-api-1.1.0] is progressing on a [branch][adbc-api-1.1.0-branch], with several API proposals merged in and others awaiting review.  They will then receive prototype implementations before being submitted for review/voting.  This is not currently targeting any release of the ADBC libraries, although we hope to wrap up this effort in the next few months.

A milestone has been created to explore [asynchronous APIs][adbc-api-1.2.0], which have been requested for a while now.

## Getting Involved

We welcome questions and contributions from all interested.  Issues
can be filed on [GitHub][4], and questions can be directed to GitHub
or the [Arrow mailing lists][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/milestone/6
[2]: #contributors
[3]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/blob/apache-arrow-adbc-0.5.0/CHANGELOG.md
[4]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues
[5]: {% link community.md %}
[adbc-api-1.1.0]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/milestone/3
[adbc-api-1.1.0-branch]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/tree/spec-1.1.0
[adbc-api-1.2.0]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/milestone/9
