---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow nanoarrow 0.3.0 Release"
date: "2023-10-03 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.3.0 release of
Apache Arrow nanoarrow. This release covers 42 resolved issues from
4 contributors.

## Release Highlights

See the
[Changelog](https://github.com/apache/arrow-nanoarrow/blob/apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.3.0/CHANGELOG.md)
for a detailed list of contributions to this release.

## C library

The nanoarrow 0.3.0 release includes a number of bugfixes and improvements
to the core C library and IPC C extension:

- Improved bit packing/unpacking utilities and performance in tandem with an
  [experiment to use bitmasks in pandas](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/54506)
- Added support for building and consuming interval arrays
- Fixed full validation of offset buffers for specific types of corrupted data
  that caused overflow
- Fixed crashes that occurred for certain types of corrupted data and improved
  error messages that were misleading for other types of corrupted data.

## R bindings

The nanoarrow R bindings are distributed as the `nanoarrow` package on
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/). The 0.3.0 release of the R bindings includes
improvements in type support and stability. Notably:

- Conversion to/from `bit64::integer64()` is now supported
- Warnings and errors for conversions that are invalid or
  may loose accuracy were improved
- Extension types and extension type registration are now supported
- Conversion of dictionary-encoded arrays to R vectors is now supported
- Conversion of map arrays to R vectors is now supported
- Improved performance of stream conversion to R vectors for streams of
  indeterminate length (e.g., database results from ADBC).

## Experimental non-CPU support

With the addition of the
[Arrow C Device data interface](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDeviceDataInterface.html)
comes an opportunity for nanoarrow to handle non-CPU (e.g., GPU) data. The
[nanoarrow_device](https://github.com/apache/arrow-nanoarrow/tree/main/extensions/nanoarrow_device)
extension was drafted in tandem with the specification and Arrow C++ implementation.
While it is not an official part of the 0.3.0 release, it is available in an
experimental state for those interested in its use and/or development.

## Contributor experience

The 0.3.0 release features adoption of `pre-commit` hooks to improve consistency
and contributor experience with a complex repository. Special thanks to
[@WillAyd](https://github.com/WillAyd) for setting this up!

## Contributors

This initial release consists of contributions from 4 contributors in addition
to the invaluable advice and support of the Apache Arrow developer mailing list.

```
$ git shortlog -sn d4f038ce58655ba6e996cdae165f1b33c3919d51..apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.3.0 | grep -v "GitHub Actions"
    40  Dewey Dunnington
     7  William Ayd
     2  Bryce Mecum
     1  Dane Pitkin
```
