---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 15.0.0 Release"
date: "2024-01-10 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 15.0.0 release. This covers
over 3 months of development work and includes [**XXX resolved issues**][1]
from [**YYY distinct contributors**][2]. See the [Install Page](https://arrow.apache.org/install/)
to learn how to get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 14.0.0 release, Curt Hagenlocher, Xuwei Fu, James Duong and Felipe Oliveira Carvalho
have been invited to be committers.
Jonathan Keane and Raúl Cumplido have joined the Project Management Committee (PMC).

As per our tradition of rotating the PMC chair once a year
Andy Grove was elected as the new PMC chair and VP.

Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## C Data Interface notes

New format strings have been added for ListView, LargeListView, BinaryView and StringView array types.


## Arrow Flight RPC notes

Flight SQL is now considered stable (GH-39037). The Flight SQL specification was clarified regarding how the result set schema of a prepared statement is affected by bound parameters (GH-37061).

The JDBC Arrow Flight SQL driver now supports mTLS authentication (GH-38460) and bind parameters (GH-33475), follows the Flight RPC spec when fetching data (GH-34532), and can reuse credentials across metadata and data connections (GH-38576). On macOS it will also use the system keychain to be consistent with other platforms (GH-39014). Applications can also retrieve the underlying Flight RPC metadata from the JDBC driver (GH-38024, GH-38022).

## C++ notes

### Compute layer

### Datasets

### Gandiva

### Parquet

### Substrait

### Miscellaneous

## C# notes

## Go Notes

### Bug Fixes

### Enhancements

## Java notes

## JavaScript notes

## Python notes

## R notes

For more on what’s in the 15.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

### Ruby

- Add `Arrow::Table#each_raw_record` and `Arrow::RecordBatch#each_raw_record` ([GH-37137](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/37137), [GH-37600](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/37600))

### C GLib

- Follow C++ changes.

## Rust notes

The Rust projects have moved to separate repositories outside the
main Arrow monorepo. For notes on the latest release of the Rust
implementation, see the latest [Arrow Rust changelog][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/milestone/56?closed=1
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/15.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/15.0.0.html#changelog
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/tags
