---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow ADBC 0.10.0 (Libraries) Release"
date: "2024-02-22 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.10.0 release of
the Apache Arrow ADBC libraries. This covers includes [**31
resolved issues**][1] from [**18 distinct contributors**][2].

This is a release of the **libraries**, which are at version
0.10.0.  The **API specification** is versioned separately and is
at version 1.1.0.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected
highlights of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have
been made: we refer you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Release Highlights

The BigQuery driver now handles large result sets, and supports passing a
scope when authenticating.  It also has better support for ARRAY types.

The C++ implementation now requires C++17 or later.

The Flight SQL driver now supports the incremental execution feature with
Flight SQL services that implement PollFlightInfo.  Also, it will reuse
credentials/cookies when creating sub-clients to fetch data.

The Go libraries now expose a `Close` method on `AdbcDatabase` structs; this
is a potentially breaking change.

The Java implementation now has Checker Framework nullness annotations.  The
driver manager interface was overhauled; this is a breaking change to the
library APIs.  The Java Flight SQL driver now supports `getObjects`.

The PostgreSQL driver will add the PostgreSQL type name to the field metadata
of columns of NUMERIC type.  Also, it now handles ENUM types.

The Python bindings now return the underlying PyArrow `RecordBatchReader` when
requested, instead of the "wrapped" reader, due to a crash.  This means that
callers will not get ADBC-wrapped exceptions from the reader.  Also, Ctrl-C
will now interrupt ADBC operations on the main thread.

The Snowflake driver now has much, much faster bulk ingestion speed as it now
uploads bulk Parquet files instead of using bind parameters.

## Contributors

```
$ git shortlog --perl-regexp --author='^((?!dependabot\[bot\]).*)$' -sn apache-arrow-adbc-0.9.0..apache-arrow-adbc-0.10.0
    22	David Li
     6	Dewey Dunnington
     4	James Duong
     4	Sutou Kouhei
     4	William Ayd
     4	davidhcoe
     3	Matt Topol
     2	Bruce Irschick
     2	Joel Lubinitsky
     2	Lubo Slivka
     2	Soumya D. Sanyal
     1	Anton Levakin
     1	Bryce Mecum
     1	Curt Hagenlocher
     1	Ruoxuan Wang
     1	Ryan Syed
     1	eitsupi
     1	olivroy
```

## Roadmap

We are planning on a 1.0.0 release of the libraries this year, either for the
next release or the release after that.

## Getting Involved

We welcome questions and contributions from all interested.  Issues
can be filed on [GitHub][4], and questions can be directed to GitHub
or the [Arrow mailing lists][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/milestone/14
[2]: #contributors
[3]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/blob/apache-arrow-adbc-0.10.0/CHANGELOG.md
[4]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues
[5]: {% link community.md %}
