---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow nanoarrow 0.4.0 Release"
date: "2024-01-29 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.4.0 release of
Apache Arrow nanoarrow. This release covers 46 resolved issues from
5 contributors.

## Release Highlights

The primary focus of the nanoarrow 0.4.0 release was testing, stability, and code
quality. Notably, an implementation of the
[C data interface integration test](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Integration.html#example-c-data-interface)
protocol was added to ensure data produced or consumed by nanoarrow can be
consumed or produced by other Arrow implementations.

Apache Arrow nanoarrow 0.4.0 also contains experimental [Python bindings](#python-bindings)
to the C library for the purposes of community testing and feedback while a more stable
set of bindings is prepared (targeted for 0.5.0).

See the
[Changelog](https://github.com/apache/arrow-nanoarrow/blob/apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.4.0/CHANGELOG.md)
for a detailed list of contributions to this release.

## Breaking Changes

Changes included in the nanoarrow 0.4.0 release will not break most downstream
code; however, several changes in the C library may result in additional compiler
warnings that could cause downstream build failures for projects with strict
compiler warning policies.

First, in debug mode (i.e., when `NANOARROW_DEBUG` is defined), an ignored return
value for functions that return `ArrowErrorCode` now issues a compiler warning
for compilers that support an "unused result" attribute. Ignoring the return value
of these functions is a common error and return values that are not
equal to `NANOARROW_OK` should be propagated as soon as possible. The C library
provides tools to check return values in a readable way. Notably:

- `NANOARROW_RETURN_NOT_OK()` can be used in a wrapper function that also returns
  `ArrowErrorCode`.
- `NANOARROW_THROW_NOT_OK()` can be used from C++ code that inclues `nanoarrow.hpp`
  and is prepared to handle exceptions.
- `NANOARROW_ASSERT_OK()` can be used to to check for `NANOARROW_OK` only in
  debug mode (i.e., silently ignore errors in release mode and will crash in
  debug mode with a message indicating the location of the error).

Of these, the first or second is preferred. The
[Getting Started with nanoarrow in C/C++ tutorial](https://arrow.apache.org/nanoarrow/main/getting-started/cpp.html#arrow-c-data-nanoarrow-interface-basics)
includes examples and advice for handling errors emanating from the nanoarrow C
library.

Second, in debug mode (i.e., when `NANOARROW_DEBUG` is defined), the appropriate
attribute was added to check the format string passed to `ArrowErrorSet()`
against the provided arguments. Correct code will be unaffected by this change;
however, actual arguments that do not match the format string (e.g., an `int64_t`
that is passed to `ArrowErrorSet()` with a format string of `"%d"`) should be
cast to the appropriate C type (e.g., `int`) or the format string should be fixed
to support the type of the actual argument (e.g., using `"%" PRId64`).

Third, functions in the C library that do not take ownersip of or modify input
are now properly marked as `const`. For example, `ArrowArrayViewGetIntUnsafe()`
previously accepted a `struct ArrowArrayView*` and now accepts a
`const struct ArrowArrayView*`. This change makes it more difficult to
accidentally modify input intended to be read-only and improves usability
from C++. Downstream projects that get a new warning about discarding a `const`
qualifier may need to adjust variable declarations or formal parameter types;
however, most projects should be unaffected by this change.

### C/C++

The nanoarrow 0.4.0 release includes a number of bugfixes and improvements
to the core C library and C++ helpers.

- An implementation of the
  [C data interface integration test](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Integration.html#example-c-data-interface)
  was added, including a reader/writer for the Arrow integration testing JSON
  format. This was used to improve test coverage of the IPC reader and to
  add nanoarrow as a participating member of integration testing in the CI
  job that runs in the main Arrow repository.
- The C library now supports a wider range of extended compiler warnings to
  make it easier to vendor in projects with strict compiler warning policies.
- C++ helpers were improved to support const-correctness. As a result,
  the `UniqueSchema`, `UniqueArray`, `UniqueArrayView`, and `UniqueBuffer` now
  work with a wider variety of C++ wrappers (e.g., `std::unordered_map`).

### R bindings

The nanoarrow R bindings are distributed as the `nanoarrow` package on
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/). The 0.4.0 release of the R bindings includes
improvements in type support and stability. Notably:

- Documentation was improved for low-level users of nanoarrow that are producing or
  consuming `ArrowArray`, `ArrowSchema`, and/or `ArrowArrayStream` structures
  from C or C++ code in other R packages.
- Improved conversion of `list()`s to support more types when the **arrow** R
  package is not available.
- Added more implmentations of `as_nanoarrow_array_stream()` to support more object
  types from the **arrow** R package.
- Added conversion from Arrow integer arrays to `character()`.

### Python bindings

The nanoarrow 0.4.0 release is the first release that contains Python bindings to the
nanoarrow C library! These initial Python bindings are experiemntal and are provided
to solicit an initial round of feedback from the Arrow community. Like the nanoarrow
C library and R bindings, it provides tools to facilitate the use of the
[Arrow C Data](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDataInterface.html)
and [Arrow C Stream](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CStreamInterface.html)
interfaces.

You can install the initial release of the Python bindings from PyPI. The `nanoarrow`
Python package has been submitted to conda-forge and should be available once the
recipe has been reviewed.

```shell
pip install nanoarrow
```

The initial release of the Python bindings contain `repr()`s to print out human-readable
representations of structures in the Arrow C Data and Stream interfaces.

```python
import nanoarrow as na
import pyarrow as pa
na.c_schema(pa.decimal128(10, 3))
```

    <nanoarrow.c_lib.CSchema decimal128(10, 3)>
    - format: 'd:10,3'
    - name: ''
    - flags: 2
    - metadata: NULL
    - dictionary: NULL
    - children[0]:

```python
na.c_array(pa.array(["one", "two", "three", None]))
```

    <nanoarrow.c_lib.CArray string>
    - length: 4
    - offset: 0
    - null_count: 1
    - buffers: (2939032895680, 2939032895616, 2939032895744)
    - dictionary: NULL
    - children[0]:

In addition to Arrow C Data interface wrappers, the initial nanoarrow Python bindings expose
wrappers for a few nanoarrow C library types like the `ArrowArrayView` that can be used to
interpret the content of the raw structures.


```python
na.c_array_view(pa.array(["one", "two", "three", None]))
```

    <nanoarrow.c_lib.CArrayView>
    - storage_type: 'string'
    - length: 4
    - offset: 0
    - null_count: 1
    - buffers[3]:
      - <bool validity[1 b] 11100000>
      - <int32 data_offset[20 b] 0 3 6 11 11>
      - <string data[11 b] b'onetwothree'>
    - dictionary: NULL
    - children[0]:

Finally, the initial bindings contain a user-facing "data type" class. The `Schema`, like its
C Data interface counterpart, can represent a `pyarrow.Schema`, a `pyarrow.Field`, or a
`pyarrow.DataType`.

```python
na.int32()
```
    Schema(INT32)

```python
na.struct({"col1": na.int32()})
```

    Schema(STRUCT, fields=[Schema(INT32, name='col1')])

The next release of nanoarrow for Python will include a user-facing `Array` class among other
improvements and features based on community feedback! For a more in-depth review of the
initial Python bindings, see the
[Getting started in Python guide](https://arrow.apache.org/nanoarrow/latest/getting-started/python.html) and the
[Python API reference](https://arrow.apache.org/nanoarrow/latest/reference/python.html)

## Contributors

This release consists of contributions from 4 contributors in addition
to the invaluable advice and support of the Apache Arrow developer mailing list.

```console
$ git shortlog -sn 798a1b8f096c84e2b6f887427649f1cb496412b2..apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.4.0 | grep -v "GitHub Actions"
  35  Dewey Dunnington
  3  William Ayd
  2  Dirk Eddelbuettel
  2  Joris Van den Bossche
  1  eitsupi
```
