---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow DataFusion 34.0.0 Released, Looking Forward to 2024"
date: "2023-06-24 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---

<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

## Introduction

[Apache Arrow DataFusion] is an extensible query engine and database
toolkit, written in [Rust], that uses [Apache Arrow] as its in-memory
format. DataFusion is targeted primarily at developers creating other data
intensive analytics.


[apache arrow datafusion]: https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/
[apache arrow]: https://arrow.apache.org
[rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org/

We recently [released DataFusion 34.0.0]. This blog highlights some of the major
improvements since we released [DataFusion 26.0.0] -– spoiler alert it is a lot
–  and a preview of where the community plans to head in the next 6 months.

[Apache Arrow DataFusion 26.0.0]: https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2023/06/24/datafusion-25.0.0/.
[released DataFusion 34.0.0]: https://crates.io/crates/datafusion/34.0.0

This is also likely to be our last update blog post on the apache arrow site –
future updates will likely be on our own website as we are working to [graduate
to a top level project] (Apache Arrow DataFusion → Apache DataFusion) to help
focus governance and help the project grow. We plan to have our [first DataFusion in person meetup] in March 2024.


[graduate to a top level project]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/discussions/6475
[first DataFusion in person meetup]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/discussions/8522

DataFusion is very much a community endeavor. Our core thesis is that as a
community we can build much more advanced technology than any individual or
company could do alone. In the last 6 months between `26.0.0` and `34.0.0`,
community growth has been strong. We have accepted and reviewed over a
thousand PRs from 124 different committers. XXX issues have been created and YYY issues
have been closed.

<!--
$ git log --pretty=oneline 26.0.0..34.0.0 . | wc -l
     1009

$ git shortlog -sn 26.0.0..34.0.0 . | wc -l
      124
-->

The rest of this post highlights some of the improvements we have made
to DataFusion over the last 6 months and a preview of where we are
heading. You can see a list of all changes in the detailed
[CHANGELOG].

[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/blob/main/datafusion/CHANGELOG.md

# Improved Performance
Performance is a key feature of DataFusion and we have made major improvements since 25.0.0

(TODO get benchmark runs of TPCH and ClickBench between 25 and 34)

Some key improvements we made:
* [2-3x Better aggregation performance with many distinct groups]
* Partially ordered grouping / streaming grouping (reduced memory)
* Joins (what to highlight??)
* TopK (ORDER BY LIMIT XXX)
* Specialized min(col) GROUP BY <xxx> ORDER by min(col) LIMIT 1 type query (TODO link / better descrioption
* Improved join performance would maybe be another thing to highlight.
* Improved sort order awareness: TODO link, example showing that we avoid resorting

[2-3x Better aggregation performance with many distinct groups]: https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2023/08/05/datafusion_fast_grouping/


# New Features

## DML / Insert / Creating Files

DataFusion now supports writing, in parallel to Parquet, CSV, JSON (ARROW?) and
soon AVRO. This includes writing in parallel to individual and multiple files

You can do this via `CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE`, for example:

```sql
(TODO example)


```

As well as the COPY command (modeled after DuckDB’s copy (TODO duckdb copy blog link)

```sql

(TODO example)
```


## Improved Struct/array support 

26.0.0 had basic support for structs and arrays, but 34.0.0 has much improved
support, and a full range of functions (TODO link to docs) for working with
structs and arrays.

(@izveigor ❤️ and jayzhan, and wejun) –

```sql
(TODO make a good example showing how arrays are used example)
```

# Other New Features:
* Group by spill to disk (TODO link)
* Join memory limiting (TODO find when this wa done)


# Easier to use DataFusion to build systems 

DataFusion’s primary design goal is as the basis used to create other systems
(TODO link to doc explaining that), though it is a reasonably good experience
out of the box as a dataframe library (TODO link to datafusion-python) and
command line SQL tool (todo link to datafusion-cli docs)

Part of making it easier to use DataFusion is improving the documentation. To
that end we have created a new [Library Users Guide] to help people build the
applications on top of DataFusion. 

[Library Users Guide]:https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/library-user-guide/index.html

We have also added User Defined Window Functions  (TODO link to documentation) , User Defined Table Functions (TODO link to doc)


### Growth of DataFusion in the Wild

DataFusion has also appeared more in public conversations such as:
* Found out about many new projects that are being built with DataFusion such as lancedb, XX and YYY (TODO links))
* A talk at [CommunityOverCode Asia 2023] titled [Apache Arrow Datafusion: Vectorized
Execution Framework For Maximum Performance]
* Blogs such as  
[Flight, DataFusion, Arrow, and Parquet: Using the FDAP Architecture to build InfluxDB 3.0].


[Apache Arrow Datafusion: Vectorized Execution Framework For Maximum Performance]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJU9rdRNk9I
[CommunityOverCode Asia 2023]: https://www.bagevent.com/event/8432178
[Flight, DataFusion, Arrow, and Parquet: Using the FDAP Architecture to build InfluxDB 3.0]: https://www.influxdata.com/blog/flight-datafusion-arrow-parquet-fdap-architecture-influxdb/

We also submitted a paper(TODO LINK) to SIGMOD 2024 (TODO link), one of the
premiere database conferences, describing DataFusion in a technically formal
style, and makes the case that a modular query engine such as DataFusion does
not have to sacrifice performance. We hope this can help people who may be
considering DataFusion to decide if it is a good fit for their needs.


# DataFusion in 2024

This year, some major initiatives we aim to undertake are:

1. Split apart the system so it is even more modular, including unifying how functions are defined to make it easier to mix and match. Improved APIs (trait based) APIs for defining extensions for Scalar, Aggregate, Window functions

2. Better testing and CI infrastructure, including fuzz testing, and better functional and performance regression testing.
2. Performance: Improved planning performance (both for wide tables of 1000s of columns, as well as in general improving efficiency of the planning process) TODO find ticket.
3. Performance of performance on high cardinality grouping  Also, our aggregation is still about 2x slower than state of the art (e.g. DuckDB) for “very high cardinality” aggregates, and we hope to improve there as well
4. Better statistics handling such as XXX, YYY with an eye towards more sophisticated analysis and cost models.
5. Further invest in advanced optimization techniques such as additional predicate pruning, bloom filtering, etc (TODO link). This largely takes the form of logic rules that can take arbitrary predicates (EXMAPLE) and prove they can not be true given information at hand, either statistics from parquet files, bloom filter,s or other sources). This is a key building block for both fast performance within datafusion as well as other systems that use datafusion expressions




# How to Get Involved

If you are interested in contributing to DataFusion, we would love to have you
join us. You can try out DataFusion on some of your own data and projects and
let us know how it goes, contribute suggestions, documentation, bug reports, or
contribute a PR with documentation, tests or code. A list of open issues
suitable for beginners is [here].

Also  looking for help to restart biweekly calls / meetings. Timezones are always a
challenge for such meetings, but we hope to have two calls that can work for
most attendees

Check out our [Communication Doc] for more ways to engage with the
community.

[here]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22
[communication doc]: https://arrow.apache.org/datafusion/contributor-guide/communication.html
