---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow 17.0.0 Release"
date: "2024-07-16 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->


The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 17.0.0 release. This covers
over 3 months of development work and includes [**331 resolved issues**][1]
on [**529 distinct commits**][2] from [**92 distinct contributors**][2].
See the [Install Page](https://arrow.apache.org/install/)
to learn how to get the libraries for your platform.

The release notes below are not exhaustive and only expose selected highlights
of the release. Many other bugfixes and improvements have been made: we refer
you to the [complete changelog][3].

## Community

Since the 16.0.0 release, Dane Pitkin has been invited to be committer.
No new members have joined the Project Management Committee (PMC).

Thanks for your contributions and participation in the project!

## C Data Interface notes

 - `ArrowDeviceArrayStream` can now be imported and exported (GH-40078)
## Arrow Flight RPC notes

- Flight SQL was formally stabilized (GH-39204).
- Flight SQL added a bulk ingestion command (GH-38255).
- The JDBC Flight SQL driver now accepts "catalog" as a connection parameter (GH-41947).
- "Stateless" prepared statements are now supported (GH-37220, GH-41262).
- Java added `FlightStatusCode.RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` (GH-35888).
- C++ has some basic support for logging with OpenTelemetry (GH-39898).

## C++ notes

- Half-float values can now be parsed and formatted correctly (GH-41089).
- Record batches can now be converted to row-major tensors, not only column-major (GH-40866).
- The CSV writer is now able to write large string arrays that are larger than
  2 GiB (GH-40270).
- A possible invalid memory access in `BooleanArray.true_count()` has been fixed (GH-41016).
- A new method `FlattenRecursively` allows recursive nesting of list and
  fixed-size list arrays (GH-41055).
- The scratch space in some `Scalar` subclasses is now immutable. This is required
  for proper concurrent access to `Scalar` instances (GH-40069).
- Calling the `bit_width` or `byte_width` method of an extension type now defers
  to the underlying storage type (GH-41353).
- Fixed a bug where `MapArray::FromArrays` would behave incorrectly if the given
  offsets array has a non-zero offset (GH-40750).
- `MapArray::FromArrays` now accepts an optional null bitmap argument
  (GH-41684).
- The `ARROW_NO_DEPRECATED_API` macro was unused and has been removed (GH-41343).

### Acero

- The left anti join filter no longer crashes when the filter rows are empty (GH-41121).
- A race condition was fixed in the asof join (GH-41149).
- A potential stack overflow has been fixed (GH-41334, GH-41738).
- A potential crash on very large data has been fixed (GH-41813).

### Compute

- List views and maps are now supported by the `if_else`, `case_when` and
  `coalesce` functions (GH-41418).
- List views are now supported by the functions `list_slice` (GH-42065),
  `list_parent_indices` (GH-42235), `take` and `filter` (GH-42116).
- `list_flatten` can now be recursive based on new optional argument
  (GH-41183, GH-41055)
- The `take` and `filter` functions have been made significantly faster on fixed-width
  types, including fixed-size lists of fixed-width types (GH-39798).

### Dataset

- Repeated scanning of an encrypted Parquet dataset now works correctly (GH-41431).

### Filesystems

- Standard filesystem implementations are now tracked in a global registry which
  also allows loading third-party filesystem implementations, for example from
  runtime-loaded DLLs (GH-40342,
- Directory metadata operations on Azure filesystems are now more aligned with
  the common expectations for filesystems (GH-41034).
- `CopyFile` is now supported for Azure filesystems with hierarchical namespace
  enabled (GH-41095).
- Azure credentials can now be loaded explicitly from the environment (GH-39345),
  or using the Azure CLI (GH-39344).
- A potential deadlock was fixed when closing an S3 output stream (GH-41862).

### GPU

- Non-CPU data can now be pretty-printed (GH-41664).
- Non-CPU data with offsets, such as list and binary data, can now be properly
  sent over IPC (GH-42198).

### IPC

- Flatbuffers serialization is now more deterministic (GH-40361).

### Parquet

- A crash was fixed when reading an invalid Parquet file where columns claim to
  be of different lengths (GH-41317).
- Definition and repetition levels are now more strictly checked, avoiding later
  crashes when reading an invalid Parquet file (GH-41321).
- A crash was fixed when reading an invalid encrypted Parquet file (GH-43070).
- Fixed a bug where the BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT decoder could behave incorrectly
  when nulls are present in a column (GH-41562).
- Fixed a bug where `DeltaLengthByteArrayEncoder::EstimatedDataEncodedSize` could
  return an invalid estimate in some situations (GH-41545).
- Delimiting records is now faster for columns with nested repeating (GH-41361).

### Substrait

- Support for more Arrow data types was added: some temporal types, half floats,
  large string and large binary (GH-40695).

## C# notes

## Go Notes

## Java notes

**Some changes are coming up in the next version, Arrow 18. Java 8 support will be removed. The version of the flight-core artifact with shaded gRPC will no longer be distributed.**
 
- Basic support for ListView (GH-41287) and StringView (GH-40339) has been added. These types should still be considered experimental. 

## JavaScript notes

## Python notes

## R notes

For more on what’s in the 17.0.0 R package, see the [R changelog][4].

## Ruby and C GLib notes

### Ruby

### C GLib

## Rust notes

The Rust projects have moved to separate repositories outside the
main Arrow monorepo. For notes on the latest release of the Rust
implementation, see the latest [Arrow Rust changelog][5].

[1]: https://github.com/apache/arrow/milestone/62?closed=1
[2]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/17.0.0.html#contributors
[3]: {{ site.baseurl }}/release/17.0.0.html#changelog
[4]: {{ site.baseurl }}/docs/r/news/
[5]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/tags
