---
layout: post
title: "Apache Arrow nanoarrow 0.8.0 Release"
date: "2026-02-24 00:00:00"
author: pmc
categories: [release]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Apache Arrow team is pleased to announce the 0.8.0 release of
Apache Arrow nanoarrow. This release consists of 28 resolved GitHub issues from
10 contributors.

## Release Highlights

- Support for building String View arrays by buffer
- LZ4 decompression support in IPC reader
- Support for Conan
- Support for Hombrew

See the
[Changelog](https://github.com/apache/arrow-nanoarrow/blob/apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.8.0/CHANGELOG.md)
for a detailed list of contributions to this release.

## Features

### String Views By Buffer

The C library in general supports two methods for producing or consuming arrays: most
users use the builder pattern (e.g., `ArrowArrayAppendString()`); however, the "build
by buffer" pattern can be effective when using nanoarrow with a higher level runtime
like C++, Rust, Python, or R, all of which have mechanisms to build buffers already.
The C library supports this with `ArrowArraySetBuffer()`; however, there was no way
to reserve and/or set variadic buffers for string view arrays. In nanoarrow 0.8.0,
the array builder API fully supports both mechanisms for building string view arrays.

### LZ4 Decompression Support

The Arrow IPC reader included in the nanoarrow C library supports most features
of the Arrow IPC format; however, decompression support for the LZ4 codec was missing
which made the library and its bindings unusable for some common use cases. In 0.8.0,
decompression for the LZ4 codec was added to the C library.

Users of the C library will need to configure CMake with `-DNANOARROW_IPC_WITH_LZ4=ON`
and `-DNANOARROW_IPC=ON` to use CMake-resolved LZ4; however, client libraries
can also use an existing ZSTD or LZ4 implementation using callbacks just like in 0.7.0.

### nanoarrow on Conan

The nanoarrow C library can now be installed using the
[Conan](https://conan.io/center/recipes/nanoarrow) C/C++ Package Manager!
CMake projects can now use `find_package(nanoarrow)` when using a Conan-enabled
toolchain after adding the nanoarrow dependency to `conanfile.txt`.

Thanks to [@wgtmac](https://github.com/wgtmac) for contributing the recipe!

### nanoarrow on Homebrew

The nanoarrow C library can now be installed using
[Homebrew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/nanoarrow)!

```shell
brew install nanoarrow
```

CMake projects can then use `find_package(nanoarrow)` when using Homebrew-provided
cmake and allows other vcpkg ports to use nanoarrow as a dependency.

Thanks to [@ankane](https://github.com/ankane) for contributing the formula!

## Contributors

This release consists of contributions from 12 contributors in addition
to the invaluable advice and support of the Apache Arrow community.

```console
$ git shortlog -sn apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.8.0.dev..apache-arrow-nanoarrow-0.8.0-rc0
    23  Dewey Dunnington
     2  Bryce Mecum
     2  Dirk Eddelbuettel
     1  Even Rouault
     1  Kevin Liu
     1  Michael Chirico
     1  Namit Kewat
     1  Nyall Dawson
     1  Sutou Kouhei
     1  William Ayd
```
